Title: Poirot Investigates Author: Agatha Christie Release date: January 28, 2020 [eBook #61262]
                Most recently updated: June 20, 2022 Language: English Credits: Produced by an anonymous Project Gutenberg volunteer. I was standing at the window of Poirot's
rooms looking out idly on the street below. "That's queer," I ejaculated suddenly beneath
my breath. "What is, mon ami?" asked Poirot placidly,
from the depths of his comfortable chair. "Deduce, Poirot, from the following facts!
Here is a young lady, richly dressed--fashionable
hat, magnificent furs. She is coming along
slowly, looking up at the houses as she goes.
Unknown to her, she is being shadowed by three
men and a middle-aged woman. They have just
been joined by an errand boy who points after
the girl, gesticulating as he does so. What
drama is this being played? Is the girl a crook,
and are the shadowers detectives preparing to
arrest her? Or are they the scoundrels, and
are they plotting to attack an innocent victim?
What does the great detective say?" "The great detective, mon ami, chooses, as ever,
the simplest course. He rises to see for himself."
And my friend joined me at the window. In a minute he gave vent to an amused chuckle. "As usual, your facts are tinged with your
incurable romanticism. That is Miss Mary
Marvell, the film star. She is being followed by
a bevy of admirers who have recognized her.
And, en passant, my dear Hastings, she is quite
aware of the fact!" I laughed. "So all is explained! But you get no marks
for that, Poirot. It was a mere matter of recognition." "En verite! And how many times have you
seen Mary Marvell on the screen, mon cher?" I thought. "About a dozen times perhaps." "And I--once! Yet I recognize her, and
you do not." "She looks so different," I replied rather feebly. "Ah! Sacre!" cried Poirot. "Is it that
you expect her to promenade herself in the streets
of London in a cowboy hat, or with bare feet,
and a bunch of curls, as an Irish colleen? Always
with you it is the non-essentials! Remember
the case of the dancer, Valerie Saintclair." I shrugged my shoulders, slightly annoyed. "But console yourself, mon ami," said Poirot,
calming down. "All cannot be as Hercule
Poirot! I know it well." "You really have the best opinion of yourself
of anyone I ever knew!" I cried, divided between
amusement and annoyance. "What will you? When one is unique, one
knows it! And others share that opinion--even,
if I mistake not, Miss Mary Marvell." "What?" "Without doubt. She is coming here." "How do you make that out?" "Very simply. This street, it is not aristocratic,
mon ami! In it there is no fashionable
doctor, no fashionable dentist--still less is there
a fashionable milliner! But there is a fashionable
detective. Oui, my friend, it is true--I am
become the mode, the dernier cri! One says
to another: 'Comment? You have lost your
gold pencil-case? You must go to the little Belgian.
He is too marvellous! Every one goes!
Courez!' And they arrive! In flocks, mon
ami! With problems of the most foolish!"
A bell rang below. "What did I tell you?
That is Miss Marvell." As usual, Poirot was right. After a short
interval, the American film star was ushered in,
and we rose to our feet. Mary Marvell was undoubtedly one of the
most popular actresses on the screen. She had
only lately arrived in England in company with
her husband, Gregory B. Rolf, also a film actor.
Their marriage had taken place about a year ago
in the States and this was their first visit to
England. They had been given a great reception.
Every one was prepared to go mad over
Mary Marvell, her wonderful clothes, her furs,
her jewels, above all one jewel, the great diamond
which had been nicknamed, to match its owner,
"the Western Star." Much, true and untrue,
had been written about this famous stone which
was reported to be insured for the enormous sum
of fifty thousand pounds. All these details passed rapidly through my
mind as I joined with Poirot in greeting our
fair client. Miss Marvell was small and slender, very
fair and girlish-looking, with the wide innocent
blue eyes of a child. Poirot drew forward a chair for her, and she
commenced talking at once. "You will probably think me very foolish,
Monsieur Poirot, but Lord Cronshaw was telling
me last night how wonderfully you cleared up
the mystery of his nephew's death, and I felt
that I just must have your advice. I dare say
it's only a silly hoax--Gregory says so--but it's
just worrying me to death." She paused for breath. Poirot beamed encouragement. "Proceed, Madame. You comprehend, I am
still in the dark." "It's these letters." Miss Marvell unclasped
her handbag, and drew out three envelopes which
she handed to Poirot. The latter scrutinized them closely. "Cheap paper--the name and address carefully
printed. Let us see the inside." He drew
out the enclosure. I had joined him, and was leaning over his
shoulder. The writing consisted of a single
sentence, carefully printed like the envelope. It
ran as follows: "The great diamond which is the left eye of
the god must return whence it came." The second letter was couched in precisely the
same terms, but the third was more explicit: "You have been warned. You have not
obeyed. Now the diamond will be taken from
you. At the full of the moon, the two diamonds
which are the left and right eye of the god shall
return. So it is written." "The first letter I treated as a joke," explained
Miss Marvell. "When I got the second, I
began to wonder. The third one came yesterday,
and it seemed to me that, after all, the matter
might be more serious than I had imagined." "I see they did not come by post, these
letters." "No; they were left by hand--by a Chinaman.
That is what frightens me." "Why?" "Because it was from a Chink in San Francisco
that Gregory bought the stone three years ago." "I see, madame, that you believe the diamond
referred to to be----" "'The Western Star,'" finished Miss Marvell.
"That's so. At the time, Gregory remembers
that there was some story attached to the stone,
but the Chink wasn't handing out any information.
Gregory says he seemed just scared to
death, and in a mortal hurry to get rid of the
thing. He only asked about a tenth of its value.
It was Greg's wedding present to me." Poirot nodded thoughtfully. "The story seems of an almost unbelievable
romanticism. And yet--who knows? I pray
of you, Hastings, hand me my little almanac." I complied. "Voyons!" said Poirot, turning the leaves. "When is the date of the full moon? Ah,
Friday next. That is in three days' time. Eh
bien, madame, you seek my advice--I give it to
you. This belle histoire may be a hoax--but it
may not! Therefore I counsel you to place the
diamond in my keeping until after Friday next.
Then we can take what steps we please." A slight cloud passed over the actress's face,
and she replied constrainedly: "I'm afraid that's impossible." "You have it with you--hein?" Poirot was
watching her narrowly. The girl hesitated a moment, then slipped her
hand into the bosom of her gown, drawing out a
long thin chain. She leaned forward, unclosing
her hand. In the palm, a stone of white fire,
exquisitely set in platinum, lay and winked at us
solemnly. Poirot drew in his breath with a long hiss. "Epatant!" he murmured. "You permit,
madame?" He took the jewel in his own hand
and scrutinized it keenly, then restored it to her
with a little bow. "A magnificent stone--without
a flaw. Ah, cent tonnerres! and you carry it
about with you, comme ca!" "No, no, I'm very careful really, Monsieur
Poirot. As a rule it's locked up in my jewel-case,
and left in the hotel safe deposit. We're
staying at the Magnificent, you know. I just
brought it along to-day for you to see." "And you will leave it with me, n'est-ce pas?
You will be advised by Papa Poirot?" "Well, you see, it's this way, Monsieur Poirot.
On Friday we're going down to Yardly Chase
to spend a few days with Lord and Lady Yardly." Her words awoke a vague echo of remembrance
in my mind. Some gossip--what was it now?
A few years ago Lord and Lady Yardly had paid
a visit to the States, rumour had it that his lordship
had rather gone the pace out there with the
assistance of some lady friends--but surely there
was something more, some gossip which coupled
Lady Yardly's name with that of a "movie"
star in California--why! it came to me in a
flash--of course it was none other than Gregory
B. Rolf. "I'll let you into a little secret, Monsieur
Poirot," Miss Marvell was continuing. "We've
got a deal on with Lord Yardly. There's some
chance of our arranging to film a play down there
in his ancestral pile." "At Yardly Chase?" I cried, interested.
"Why, it's one of the show places of England." Miss Marvell nodded. "I guess it's the real old feudal stuff all right.
But he wants a pretty stiff price, and of course
I don't know yet whether the deal will go through,
but Greg and I always like to combine business
with pleasure." "But--I demand pardon if I am dense,
madame--surely it is possible to visit Yardly
Chase without taking the diamond with you?" A shrewd, hard look came into Miss Marvell's
eyes which belied their childlike appearance. She
looked suddenly a good deal older. "I want to wear it down there." "Surely" I said suddenly, "there are some
very famous jewels in the Yardly collection, a
large diamond amongst them?" "That's so," said Miss Marvell briefly. I heard Poirot murmur beneath his breath:
"Ah, c'est comme ca!" Then he said aloud,
with his usual uncanny luck in hitting the bull's-eye
(he dignifies it by the name of psychology):
"Then you are without doubt already acquainted
with Lady Yardly, or perhaps your husband is?" "Gregory knew her when she was out West
three years ago," said Miss Marvell. She hesitated
a moment, and then added abruptly: "Do
either of you ever see Society Gossip?" We both pleaded guilty rather shamefacedly. "I ask because in this week's number there
is an article on famous jewels, and it's really very
curious----" She broke off. I rose, went to the table at the other side of
the room and returned with the paper in question
in my hand. She took it from me, found the
article, and began to read aloud: ". . . Amongst other famous stones may be
included the Star of the East, a diamond in the
possession of the Yardly family. An ancestor of
the present Lord Yardly brought it back with
him from China, and a romantic story is said to
attach to it. According to this, the stone was
once the right eye of a temple god. Another
diamond, exactly similar in form and size, formed
the left eye, and the story goes that this jewel,
too, would in course of time be stolen. 'One
eye shall go West, the other East, till they shall
meet once more. Then, in triumph shall they
return to the god.' It is a curious coincidence
that there is at the present time a stone corresponding
closely in description with this one, and
known as 'the Star of the West,' or 'the Western
Star.' It is the property of the celebrated film
actress, Miss Mary Marvell. A comparison of
the two stones would be interesting." She stopped. "Epatant!" murmured Poirot. "Without
doubt a romance of the first water." He turned
to Mary Marvell. "And you are not afraid,
madame? You have no superstitious terrors?
You do not fear to introduce these two Siamese
twins to each other lest a Chinaman should appear
and, hey presto! whisk them both back to
China?" His tone was mocking, but I fancied that an
undercurrent of seriousness lay beneath it. "I don't believe that Lady Yardly's diamond
is anything like as good a stone as mine," said
Miss Marvell. "Anyway, I'm going to see." What more Poirot would have said I do not
know, for at that moment the door flew open,
and a splendid-looking man strode into the room.
From his crisply curling black head, to the tips
of his patent-leather boots, he was a hero fit for
romance. "I said I'd call round for you, Mary," said
Gregory Rolf, "and here I am. Well, what
does Monsieur Poirot say to our little problem?
Just one big hoax, same as I do?" Poirot smiled up at the big actor. They made
a ridiculous contrast. "Hoax or no hoax, Mr. Rolf," he said dryly,
"I have advised Madame your wife not to take
the jewel with her to Yardly Chase on Friday." "I'm with you there, sir. I've already said so
to Mary. But there! She's a woman through
and through, and I guess she can't bear to think
of another woman outshining her in the jewel
line." "What nonsense, Gregory!" said Mary
Marvell sharply. But she flushed angrily. Poirot shrugged his shoulders. "Madame, I have advised. I can do no
more. C'est fini." He bowed them both to the door. "Ah! la la," he observed, returning. "Histoire
de femmes! The good husband, he hit the
nail on the head--tout de meme, he was not tactful!
Assuredly not." I imparted to him my vague remembrances,
and he nodded vigorously. "So I thought. All the same, there is something
curious underneath all this. With your
permission, mon ami, I will take the air. Await
my return, I beg of you. I shall not be long." I was half asleep in my chair when the landlady
tapped on the door, and put her head in. "It's another lady to see Mr. Poirot, sir. I've
told her he was out, but she says as how she'll
wait, seeing as she's come up from the country." "Oh, show her in here, Mrs. Murchison.
Perhaps I can do something for her." In another moment the lady had been ushered
in. My heart gave a leap as I recognized her.
Lady Yardly's portrait had figured too often in
the Society papers to allow her to remain unknown. "Do sit down, Lady Yardly," I said, drawing
forward a chair. "My friend Poirot is out, but
I know for a fact that he'll be back very shortly." She thanked me and sat down. A very different
type, this, from Miss Mary Marvell. Tall,
dark, with flashing eyes, and a pale proud face--yet
something wistful in the curves of the
mouth. I felt a desire to rise to the occasion. Why
not? In Poirot's presence I have frequently
felt a difficulty--I do not appear at my best.
And yet there is no doubt that I, too, possess
the deductive sense in a marked degree. I leant
forward on a sudden impulse. "Lady Yardly," I said, "I know why you
have come here. You have received blackmailing
letters about the diamond." There was no doubt as to my bolt having shot
home. She stared at me open-mouthed, all
colour banished from her cheeks. "You know?" she gasped. "How?" I smiled. "By a perfectly logical process. If Miss
Marvell has had warning letters----" "Miss Marvell? She has been here?" "She has just left. As I was saying, if she,
as the holder of one of the twin diamonds, has
received a mysterious series of warnings, you, as
the holder of the other stone, must necessarily
have done the same. You see how simple it is?
I am right, then, you have received these strange
communications also?" For a moment she hesitated, as though in
doubt whether to trust me or not, then she bowed
her head in assent with a little smile. "That is so," she acknowledged. "Were yours, too, left by hand--by a Chinaman?" "No, they came by post; but, tell me, has
Miss Marvell undergone the same experience,
then?" I recounted to her the events of the morning.
She listened attentively. "It all fits in. My letters are the duplicates
of hers. It is true that they came by post, but
there is a curious perfume impregnating them--something
in the nature of joss-stick--that at
once suggested the East to me. What does it
all mean?" I shook my head. "That is what we must find out. You have
the letters with you? We might learn something
from the postmarks." "Unfortunately I destroyed them. You
understand, at the time I regarded it as some
foolish joke. Can it be true that some Chinese
gang are really trying to recover the diamonds?
It seems too incredible." We went over the facts again and again, but
could get no further towards the elucidation of
the mystery. At last Lady Yardly rose. "I really don't think I need wait for Monsieur
Poirot. You can tell him all this, can't you?
Thank you so much, Mr.----" She hesitated, her hand outstretched. "Captain Hastings." "Of course! How stupid of me. You're a
friend of the Cavendishes, aren't you? It was
Mary Cavendish who sent me to Monsieur
Poirot." When my friend returned, I enjoyed telling
him the tale of what had occurred during his
absence. He cross-questioned me rather sharply
over the details of our conversation and I could
read between the lines that he was not best
pleased to have been absent. I also fancied that
the dear old fellow was just the least inclined to
be jealous. It had become rather a pose with him
to consistently belittle my abilities, and I think
he was chagrined at finding no loophole for
criticism. I was secretly rather pleased with
myself, though I tried to conceal the fact for fear
of irritating him. In spite of his idiosyncrasies,
I was deeply attached to my quaint little friend. "Bien!" he said at length, with a curious
look on his face. "The plot develops. Pass
me, I pray you, that 'Peerage' on the top shelf
there." He turned the leaves. "Ah, here we
are! 'Yardly . . . 10th viscount, served South
African War' . . . tout ca n'a pas d'importance
. . . 'mar. 1907 Hon. Maude Stopperton, fourth
daughter of 3rd Baron Cotteril' . . . um, um,
um, . . . 'has iss. two daughters, born 1908,
1910. . . . Clubs . . . residences.' . . . Voila,
that does not tell us much. But to-morrow
morning we see this milord!" "What?" "Yes. I telegraphed to him." "I thought you had washed your hands of
the case?" "I am not acting for Miss Marvell since she
refuses to be guided by my advice. What I do
now is for my own satisfaction--the satisfaction
of Hercule Poirot! Decidedly, I must have a
finger in this pie." "And you calmly wire Lord Yardly to dash
up to town just to suit your convenience. He
won't be pleased." "Au contraire, if I preserve for him his family
diamond, he ought to be very grateful." "Then you really think there is a chance of
it being stolen?" I asked eagerly. "Almost a certainty," replied Poirot placidly.
"Everything points that way." "But how----" Poirot stopped my eager questions with an airy
gesture of the hand. "Not now, I pray you. Let us not confuse
the mind. And observe that 'Peerage'--how
you have replaced him! See you not that the
tallest books go in the top shelf, the next tallest
in the row beneath, and so on. Thus we have
order, method, which, as I have often told you,
Hastings----" "Exactly," I said hastily, and put the offending
volume in its proper place. Lord Yardly turned out to be a cheery, loud-voiced
sportsman with a rather red face, but with
a good-humoured bonhomie about him that was
distinctly attractive and made up for any lack of
mentality. "Extraordinary business this, Monsieur Poirot.
Can't make head or tail of it. Seems my wife's
been getting odd kind of letters, and that this
Miss Marvell's had 'em too. What does it all
mean?" Poirot handed him the copy of Society Gossip. "First, milord, I would ask you if these facts
are substantially correct?" The peer took it. His face darkened with
anger as he read. "Damned nonsense!" he spluttered. "There's
never been any romantic story attaching to
the diamond. It came from India originally,
I believe. I never heard of all this Chinese god
stuff." "Still, the stone is known as 'The Star of the
East.'" "Well, what if it is?" he demanded wrathfully. Poirot smiled a little, but made no direct reply.
"What I would ask you to do, milord, is to
place yourself in my hands. If you do so unreservedly,
I have great hopes of averting the
catastrophe." "Then you think there's actually something
in these wild-cat tales?" "Will you do as I ask you?" "Of course I will, but----" "Bien! Then permit that I ask you a few
questions. This affair of Yardly Chase, is it,
as you say, all fixed up between you and Mr.
Rolf?" "Oh, he told you about it, did he? No,
there's nothing settled." He hesitated, the
brick-red colour of his face deepening. "Might
as well get the thing straight. I've made rather
an ass of myself in many ways, Monsieur Poirot--and
I'm head over ears in debt--but I want
to pull up. I'm fond of the kids, and I want
to straighten things up, and be able to live on
at the old place. Gregory Rolf is offering me
big money--enough to set me on my feet again.
I don't want to do it--I hate the thought of all
that crowd play-acting round the Chase--but I
may have to, unless----" He broke off. Poirot eyed him keenly. "You have, then,
another string to your bow? Permit that I
make a guess? It is to sell the Star of the
East?" Lord Yardly nodded. "That's it. It's been
in the family for some generations, but it's not
entailed. Still, it's not the easiest thing in the
world to find a purchaser. Hoffberg, the Hatton
Garden man, is on the look-out for a likely customer,
but he'll have to find one soon, or it's a
washout." "One more question, permettez--Lady Yardly,
which plan does she approve?" "Oh, she's bitterly opposed to my selling the
jewel. You know what women are. She's all
for this film stunt." "I comprehend," said Poirot. He remained
a moment or so in thought, then rose briskly to
his feet. "You return to Yardly Chase at once?
Bien! Say no word to anyone--to anyone
mind--but expect us there this evening. We
will arrive shortly after five." "All right, but I don't see----" "Ca n'a pas d'importance," said Poirot kindly.
"You will that I preserve for you your diamond,
n'est-ce pas?" "Yes, but----" "Then do as I say." A sadly bewildered nobleman left the room. It was half-past five when we arrived at Yardly
Chase, and followed the dignified butler to the
old panelled hall with its fire of blazing logs. A
pretty picture met our eyes: Lady Yardly and
her two children, the mother's proud dark head
bent down over the two fair ones. Lord Yardly
stood near, smiling down on them. "Monsieur Poirot and Captain Hastings,"
announced the butler. Lady Yardly looked up with a start, her husband
came forward uncertainly, his eyes seeking instruction
from Poirot. The little man was equal
to the occasion. "All my excuses! It is that I investigate
still this affair of Miss Marvell's. She comes to
you on Friday, does she not? I make a little
tour first to make sure that all is secure. Also
I wanted to ask of Lady Yardly if she recollected
at all the postmarks on the letters she received?" Lady Yardly shook her head regretfully. "I'm
afraid I don't. It is stupid of me. But, you
see, I never dreamt of taking them seriously." "You'll stay the night?" said Lord Yardly. "Oh, milord, I fear to incommode you. We
have left our bags at the inn." "That's all right." Lord Yardly had his cue.
"We'll send down for them. No, no--no
trouble, I assure you." Poirot permitted himself to be persuaded, and
sitting down by Lady Yardly, began to make
friends with the children. In a short time they
were all romping together, and had dragged me
into the game. "Vous etes bonne mere," said Poirot, with a
gallant little bow, as the children were removed
reluctantly by a stern nurse. Lady Yardly smoothed her ruffled hair. "I adore them," she said with a little catch
in her voice. "And they you--with reason!" Poirot bowed
again. A dressing-gong sounded, and we rose to go
up to our rooms. At that moment the butler
entered with a telegram on a salver which he
handed to Lord Yardly. The latter tore it open
with a brief word of apology. As he read it he
stiffened visibly. With an ejaculation, he handed it to his wife.
Then he glanced at my friend. "Just a minute, Monsieur Poirot. I feel
you ought to know about this. It's from Hoffberg.
He thinks he's found a customer for the
diamond--an American, sailing for the States
to-morrow. They're sending down a chap to-night
to vet the stone. By Jove, though, if this
goes through----" Words failed him. Lady Yardly had turned away. She still held
the telegram in her hand. "I wish you wouldn't sell it, George," she
said, in a low voice. "It's been in the family so
long." She waited, as though for a reply, but
when none came her face hardened. She
shrugged her shoulders. "I must go and dress.
I suppose I had better display 'the goods.'"
She turned to Poirot with a slight grimace.
"It's one of the most hideous necklaces that
was ever designed! George has always promised
to have the stones reset for me, but it's
never been done." She left the room. Half an hour later, we three were assembled
in the great drawing-room awaiting the lady.
It was already a few minutes past the dinner
hour. Suddenly there was a low rustle, and Lady
Yardly appeared framed in the doorway, a radiant
figure in a long white shimmering dress. Round
the column of her neck was a rivulet of fire. She
stood there with one hand just touching the
necklace. "Behold the sacrifice," she said gaily. Her
ill-humour seemed to have vanished. "Wait
while I turn the big light on and you shall feast
your eyes on the ugliest necklace in England." The switches were just outside the door. As
she stretched out her hand to them, the incredible
thing happened. Suddenly without any warning,
every light was extinguished, the door
banged, and from the other side of it came a long-drawn
piercing woman's scream. "My God!" cried Lord Yardly. "That
was Maude's voice! What has happened?" We rushed blindly for the door, cannoning
into each other in the darkness. It was some
minutes before we could find it. What a sight
met our eyes! Lady Yardly lay senseless on
the marble floor, a crimson mark on her white
throat where the necklace had been wrenched
from her neck. As we bent over her, uncertain for the moment
whether she were dead or alive, her eyelids
opened. "The Chinaman," she whispered painfully.
"The Chinaman--the side door." Lord Yardly sprang up with an oath. I
accompanied him, my heart beating wildly. The
Chinaman again! The side door in question
was a small one in the angle of the wall, not more
than a dozen yards from the scene of the tragedy.
As we reached it, I gave a cry. There, just short
of the threshold, lay the glittering necklace,
evidently dropped by the thief in the panic of his
flight. I swooped joyously down on it. Then
I uttered another cry which Lord Yardly echoed.
For in the middle of the necklace was a great
gap. The Star of the East was missing! "That settles it," I breathed. "These were
no ordinary thieves. This one stone was all
they wanted." "But how did the fellow get in?" "Through this door." "But it's always locked." I shook my head. "It's not locked now.
See." I pulled it open as I spoke. As I did so something fluttered to the ground.
I picked it up. It was a piece of silk, and the
embroidery was unmistakable. It had been
torn from a Chinaman's robe. "In his haste it caught in the door," I explained.
"Come, hurry. He cannot have gone
far as yet." But in vain we hunted and searched. In the
pitch darkness of the night, the thief had found
it easy to make his getaway. We returned
reluctantly, and Lord Yardly sent off one of the
footmen post-haste to fetch the police. Lady Yardly, aptly ministered to by Poirot,
who is as good as a woman in these matters, was
sufficiently recovered to be able to tell her story. "I was just going to turn on the other light,"
she said, "when a man sprang on me from behind.
He tore my necklace from my neck with
such force that I fell headlong to the floor. As I
fell I saw him disappearing through the side
door. Then I realized by the pig-tail and the
embroidered robe that he was a Chinaman."
She stopped with a shudder. The butler reappeared. He spoke in a low
voice to Lord Yardly. "A gentleman from Mr. Hoffberg's, m'lord.
He says you expect him." "Good heavens!" cried the distracted nobleman.
"I must see him, I suppose. No, not
here, Mullings, in the library." I drew Poirot aside. "Look here, my dear fellow, hadn't we better
get back to London?" "You think so, Hastings? Why?" "Well"--I coughed delicately--"things
haven't gone very well, have they? I mean,
you tell Lord Yardly to place himself in your
hands and all will be well--and then the diamond
vanishes from under your very nose!" "True," said Poirot, rather crestfallen. "It
was not one of my most striking triumphs." This way of describing events almost caused
me to smile, but I stuck to my guns. "So, having--pardon the expression--rather
made a mess of things, don't you think it would
be more graceful to leave immediately?" "And the dinner, the without doubt excellent
dinner, that the chef of Lord Yardly has prepared?" "Oh, what's dinner!" I said impatiently. Poirot held up his hands in horror. "Mon Dieu! It is that in this country you
treat the affairs gastronomic with a criminal
indifference." "There's another reason why we should get
back to London as soon as possible," I continued. "What is that, my friend?" "The other diamond," I said, lowering my
voice. "Miss Marvell's." "Eh bien, what of it?" "Don't you see?" His unusual obtuseness
annoyed me. What had happened to his usually
keen wits? "They've got one, now they'll go
for the other." "Tiens!" cried Poirot, stepping back a pace
and regarding me with admiration. "But your
brain marches to a marvel, my friend! Figure
to yourself that for the moment I had not thought
of that! But there is plenty of time. The full
of the moon, it is not until Friday." I shook my head dubiously. The full of the
moon theory left me entirely cold. I had my
way with Poirot, however, and we departed
immediately, leaving behind us a note of explanation
and apology for Lord Yardly. My idea was to go at once to the Magnificent,
and relate to Miss Marvell what had occurred,
but Poirot vetoed the plan, and insisted that the
morning would be time enough. I gave in
rather grudgingly. In the morning Poirot seemed strangely disinclined
to stir out. I began to suspect that,
having made a mistake to start with, he was
singularly loath to proceed with the case. In
answer to my persuasions, he pointed out, with
admirable common sense, that as the details of
the affair at Yardly Chase were already in the
morning papers the Rolfs would know quite as
much as we could tell them. I gave way unwillingly. Events proved my forebodings to be justified.
About two o'clock, the telephone rang. Poirot
answered it. He listened for some moments,
then with a brief "Bien, j'y serai" he rang off,
and turned to me. "What do you think, mon ami?" He
looked half ashamed, half excited. "The diamond
of Miss Marvell, it has been stolen." "What?" I cried, springing up. "And
what about the 'full of the moon' now?"
Poirot hung his head. "When did this happen?" "This morning, I understand." I shook my head sadly. "If only you had
listened to me. You see I was right." "It appears so, mon ami," said Poirot
cautiously. "Appearances are deceptive, they
say, but it certainly appears so." As we hurried in a taxi to the Magnificent, I
puzzled out the true inwardness of the scheme. "That 'full of the moon' idea was clever.
The whole point of it was to get us to concentrate
on the Friday, and so be off our guard beforehand.
It is a pity you did not realize that." "Ma foi!" said Poirot airily, his nonchalance
quite restored after its brief eclipse. "One
cannot think of everything!" I felt sorry for him. He did so hate failure
of any kind. "Cheer up," I said consolingly. "Better
luck next time." At the Magnificent, we were ushered at once
into the manager's office. Gregory Rolf was
there with two men from Scotland Yard. A
pale-faced clerk sat opposite them. Rolf nodded to us as we entered. "We're getting to the bottom of it," he said.
"But it's almost unbelievable. How the guy
had the nerve I can't think." A very few minutes sufficed to give us the
facts. Mr. Rolf had gone out of the hotel at
11.15. At 11.30, a gentleman, so like him in
appearance as to pass muster, entered the hotel
and demanded the jewel-case from the safe
deposit. He duly signed the receipt, remarking
carelessly as he did so: "Looks a bit different
from my ordinary one, but I hurt my hand getting
out of the taxi." The clerk merely smiled and
remarked that he saw very little difference. Rolf
laughed and said: "Well, don't run me in as a
crook this time, anyway. I've been getting
threatening letters from a Chinaman, and the
worst of it is I look rather like a Chink myself--it's
something about the eyes." "I looked at him," said the clerk who was
telling us this, "and I saw at once what he meant.
The eyes slanted up at the corners like an
Oriental's. I'd never noticed it before." "Darn it all, man," roared Gregory Rolf,
leaning forward, "do you notice it now?" The man looked up at him and started. "No, sir," he said. "I can't say I do."
And indeed there was nothing even remotely
Oriental about the frank brown eyes that looked
into ours. The Scotland Yard man grunted. "Bold
customer. Thought the eyes might be noticed,
and took the bull by the horns to disarm suspicion.
He must have watched you out of the
hotel, sir, and nipped in as soon as you were well
away." "What about the jewel-case?" I asked. "It was found in a corridor of the hotel.
Only one thing had been taken--'the Western
Star.'" We stared at each other--the whole thing
was so bizarre, so unreal. Poirot hopped briskly to his feet. "I have
not been of much use, I fear," he said regretfully.
"Is it permitted to see Madame?" "I guess she's prostrated with the shock,"
explained Rolf. "Then perhaps I might have a few words
alone with you, monsieur?" "Certainly." In about five minutes Poirot reappeared. "Now, my friend," he said gaily. "To a
post office. I have to send a telegram." "Who to?" "Lord Yardly." He discounted further
inquiries by slipping his arm through mine.
"Come, come, mon ami. I know all that you
feel about this miserable business. I have not
distinguished myself! You, in my place, might
have distinguished yourself! Bien! All is
admitted. Let us forget it and have lunch." It was about four o'clock when we entered
Poirot's rooms. A figure rose from a chair by
the window. It was Lord Yardly. He looked
haggard and distraught. "I got your wire and came up at once. Look
here, I've been round to Hoffberg, and they
know nothing about that man of theirs last night,
or the wire either. Do you think that----" Poirot held up his hand. "My excuses! I sent that wire, and hired
the gentleman in question." "You--but why? What?" The nobleman
spluttered impotently. "My little idea was to bring things to a head,"
explained Poirot placidly. "Bring things to a head! Oh, my God!"
cried Lord Yardly. "And the ruse succeeded," said Poirot cheerfully.
"Therefore, milord, I have much pleasure
in returning you--this!" With a dramatic
gesture he produced a glittering object. It was
a great diamond. "The Star of the East," gasped Lord Yardly.
"But I don't understand----" "No?" said Poirot. "It makes no matter.
Believe me, it was necessary for the diamond to
be stolen. I promised you that it should be
preserved to you, and I have kept my word. You
must permit me to keep my little secret. Convey,
I beg of you, the assurances of my deepest
respect to Lady Yardly, and tell her how pleased
I am to be able to restore her jewel to her. What
beau temps, is it not? Good day, milord." And smiling and talking, the amazing little
man conducted the bewildered nobleman to the
door. He returned gently rubbing his hands. "Poirot," I said. "Am I quite demented?" "No, mon ami, but you are, as always, in a
mental fog." "How did you get the diamond." "From Mr. Rolf." "Rolf?" "Mais oui! The warning letters, the Chinaman,
the article in Society Gossip, all sprang from
the ingenious brain of Mr. Rolf! The two
diamonds, supposed to be so miraculously alike--bah!
they did not exist. There was only one
diamond, my friend! Originally in the Yardly
collection, for three years it has been in the
possession of Mr. Rolf. He stole it this morning
with the assistance of a touch of grease paint
at the corner of each eye! Ah, I must see him
on the film, he is indeed an artist, celui-la! "But why should he steal his own diamond?"
I asked, puzzled. "For many reasons. To begin with, Lady
Yardly was getting restive." "Lady Yardly?" "You comprehend she was left much alone in
California. Her husband was amusing himself
elsewhere. Mr. Rolf was handsome, he had an
air about him of romance. But au fond, he is
very business-like, ce monsieur! He made love
to Lady Yardly, and then he blackmailed her.
I taxed the lady with the truth the other night,
and she admitted it. She swore that she had
only been indiscreet, and I believe her. But,
undoubtedly, Rolf had letters of hers that could
be twisted to bear a different interpretation.
Terrified by the threat of a divorce, and the prospect
of being separated from her children, she
agreed to all he wished. She had no money of
her own, and she was forced to permit him to
substitute a paste replica for the real stone. The
coincidence of the date of the appearance of 'the
Western Star' struck me at once. All goes well.
Lord Yardly prepares to range himself--to
settle down. And then comes the menace of the
possible sale of the diamond. The substitution
will be discovered. Without doubt she writes
off frantically to Gregory Rolf who has just
arrived in England. He soothes her by promising
to arrange all--and prepares for a double
robbery. In this way he will quiet the lady, who
might conceivably tell all to her husband, an
affair which would not suit our blackmailer at
all, he will have PS50,000 insurance money (aha,
you had forgotten that!), and he will still have
the diamond! At this point I put my finger in
the pie. The arrival of a diamond expert is
announced. Lady Yardly, as I felt sure she
would, immediately arranges a robbery--and
does it very well too! But Hercule Poirot, he
sees nothing but facts. What happens in actuality?
The lady switches off the light, bangs the
door, throws the necklace down the passage, and
screams. She has already wrenched out the
diamond with pliers upstairs----" "But we saw the necklace round her neck!"
I objected. "I demand pardon, my friend. Her hand
concealed the part of it where the gap would
have shown. To place a piece of silk in the door
beforehand is child's play! Of course, as soon
as Rolf read of the robbery, he arranged his own
little comedy. And very well he played it!" "What did you say to him?" I asked with
lively curiosity. "I said to him that Lady Yardly had told her
husband all, that I was empowered to recover the
jewel, and that if it were not immediately handed
over proceedings would be taken. Also a few
more little lies which occurred to me. He was
as wax in my hands!" I pondered the matter. "It seems a little unfair on Mary Marvell.
She has lost her diamond through no fault of her
own." "Bah!" said Poirot brutally. "She has a
magnificent advertisement. That is all she cares
for, that one! Now the other, she is different.
Bonne mere, tres femme!" "Yes," I said doubtfully, hardly sharing
Poirot's views on femininity. "I suppose it
was Rolf who sent her the duplicate letters." "Pas du tout," said Poirot briskly. "She
came by the advice of Mary Cavendish to seek
my aid in her dilemma. Then she heard that
Mary Marvell, whom she knew to be her enemy,
had been here, and she changed her mind, jumping
at a pretext that you, my friend, offered her.
A very few questions sufficed to show me that
you told her of the letters, not she you! She
jumped at the chance your words offered." "I don't believe it," I cried, stung. "Si, si, mon ami, it is a pity that you study not
the psychology. She told you that the letters
were destroyed? Oh, la la, never does a woman
destroy a letter if she can avoid it! Not even if
it would be more prudent to do so!" "It's all very well," I said, my anger rising,
"but you've made a perfect fool of me! From
beginning to end! No, it's all very well to try
and explain it away afterwards. There really
is a limit!" "But you were so enjoying yourself, my friend.
I had not the heart to shatter your illusions." "It's no good. You've gone a bit too far
this time." "Mon Dieu! but how you enrage yourself for
nothing, mon ami!" "I'm fed up!" I went out, banging the
door. Poirot had made an absolute laughing-stock
of me. I decided that he needed a sharp
lesson. I would let some time elapse before I
forgave him. He had encouraged me to make a
perfect fool of myself! I had been called away from town for a few
days, and on my return found Poirot in the
act of strapping up his small valise. "A la bonne heure, Hastings. I feared you
would not have returned in time to accompany
me." "You are called away on a case, then?" "Yes, though I am bound to admit that, on
the face of it, the affair does not seem promising.
The Northern Union Insurance Company have
asked me to investigate the death of a Mr. Maltravers
who a few weeks ago insured his life with
them for the large sum of fifty thousand pounds." "Yes?" I said, much interested. "There was, of course, the usual suicide clause
in the policy. In the event of his committing
suicide within a year the premiums would be
forfeited. Mr. Maltravers was duly examined
by the Company's own doctor, and although he
was a man slightly past the prime of life was
passed as being in quite sound health. However,
on Wednesday last--the day before yesterday--the
body of Mr. Maltravers was found in
the grounds of his house in Essex, Marsdon
Manor, and the cause of his death is described
as some kind of internal haemorrhage. That in
itself would be nothing remarkable, but sinister
rumours as to Mr. Maltravers' financial position
have been in the air of late, and the Northern
Union have ascertained beyond any possible
doubt that the deceased gentleman stood upon
the verge of bankruptcy. Now that alters matters
considerably. Maltravers had a beautiful
young wife, and it is suggested that he got together
all the ready money he could for the purpose
of paying the premiums on a life insurance
for his wife's benefit, and then committed suicide.
Such a thing is not uncommon. In any case,
my friend Alfred Wright, who is a director of the
Northern Union, has asked me to investigate the
facts of the case, but, as I told him, I am not very
hopeful of success. If the cause of the death
had been heart failure, I should have been more
sanguine. Heart failure may always be translated
as the inability of the local G.P. to discover
what his patient really did die of, but a haemorrhage
seems fairly definite. Still, we can but
make some necessary inquiries. Five minutes to
pack your bag, Hastings, and we will take a taxi
to Liverpool Street." About an hour later, we alighted from a Great
Eastern train at the little station of Marsdon
Leigh. Inquiries at the station yielded the information
that Marsdon Manor was about a mile
distant. Poirot decided to walk, and we betook
ourselves along the main street. "What is our plan of campaign?" I asked. "First I will call upon the doctor. I have
ascertained that there is only one doctor in Marsdon
Leigh, Dr. Ralph Bernard. Ah, here we are
at his house." The house in question was a kind of superior
cottage, standing back a little from the road. A
brass plate on the gate bore the doctor's name.
We passed up the path and rang the bell. We proved to be fortunate in our call. It was
the doctor's consulting hour, and for the moment
there were no patients waiting for him. Dr.
Bernard was an elderly man, high-shouldered and
stooping, with a pleasant vagueness of manner. Poirot introduced himself and explained the
purpose of our visit, adding that Insurance Companies
were bound to investigate fully in a case of
this kind. "Of course, of course," said Dr. Bernard
vaguely. "I suppose, as he was such a rich
man, his life was insured for a big sum?" "You consider him a rich man, doctor?" The doctor looked rather surprised. "Was he not? He kept two cars, you know,
and Marsdon Manor is a pretty big place to keep
up, although I believe he bought it very cheap." "I understand that he had had considerable
losses of late," said Poirot, watching the doctor
narrowly. The latter, however, merely shook his head
sadly. "Is that so? Indeed. It is fortunate for his
wife, then, that there is this life insurance. A
very beautiful and charming young creature, but
terribly unstrung by this sad catastrophe. A
mass of nerves, poor thing. I have tried to spare
her all I can, but of course the shock was bound
to be considerable." "You had been attending Mr. Maltravers
recently?" "My dear sir, I never attended him." "What?" "I understand Mr. Maltravers was a Christian
Scientist--or something of that kind." "But you examined the body?" "Certainly. I was fetched by one of the
under-gardeners." "And the cause of death was clear?" "Absolutely. There was blood on the lips,
but most of the bleeding must have been internal." "Was he still lying where he had been found?" "Yes, the body had not been touched. He
was lying at the edge of a small plantation. He
had evidently been out shooting rooks, a small
rook rifle lay beside him. The haemorrhage
must have occurred quite suddenly. Gastric
ulcer, without a doubt." "No question of his having been shot, eh?" "My dear sir!" "I demand pardon," said Poirot humbly.
"But, if my memory is not at fault, in the case of
a recent murder, the doctor first gave a verdict of
heart failure--altering it when the local constable
pointed out that there was a bullet wound through
the head!" "You will not find any bullet wounds on
the body of Mr. Maltravers," said Dr. Bernard
dryly. "Now, gentlemen, if there is nothing
further----" We took the hint. "Good morning, and many thanks to you,
doctor, for so kindly answering our questions.
By the way, you saw no need for an autopsy?" "Certainly not." The doctor became quite
apoplectic. "The cause of death was clear, and
in my profession we see no need to distress unduly
the relatives of a dead patient." And, turning, the doctor slammed the door
sharply in our faces. "And what do you think of Dr. Bernard,
Hastings?" inquired Poirot, as we proceeded
on our way to the Manor. "Rather an old ass." "Exactly. Your judgments of character are
always profound, my friend." I glanced at him uneasily, but he seemed perfectly
serious. A twinkle, however, came into
his eye, and he added slyly: "That is to say, when there is no question of
a beautiful woman!" I looked at him coldly. On our arrival at the manor-house, the door
was opened to us by a middle-aged parlourmaid.
Poirot handed her his card, and a letter from the
Insurance Company for Mrs. Maltravers. She
showed us into a small morning-room, and retired
to tell her mistress. About ten minutes elapsed,
and then the door opened, and a slender figure in
widow's weeds stood upon the threshold. "Monsieur Poirot?" she faltered. "Madame!" Poirot sprang gallantly to his
feet and hastened towards her. "I cannot tell
you how I regret to derange you in this way.
But what will you? Les affaires--they know no
mercy." Mrs. Maltravers permitted him to lead her to
a chair. Her eyes were red with weeping, but
the temporary disfigurement could not conceal
her extraordinary beauty. She was about twenty-seven
or eight, and very fair, with large blue eyes
and a pretty pouting mouth. "It is something about my husband's insurance,
is it? But must I be bothered now--so
soon?" "Courage, my dear Madame. Courage!
You see, your late husband insured his life for
rather a large sum, and in such a case the Company
always has to satisfy itself as to a few details.
They have empowered me to act for them. You
can rest assured that I will do all in my power to
render the matter not too unpleasant for you.
Will you recount to me briefly the sad events of
Wednesday?" "I was changing for tea when my maid came
up--one of the gardeners had just run to the
house. He had found----" Her voice trailed away. Poirot pressed her
hand sympathetically. "I comprehend. Enough! You had seen
your husband earlier in the afternoon?" "Not since lunch. I had walked down to the
village for some stamps, and I believe he was out
pottering round the grounds." "Shooting rooks, eh?" "Yes, he usually took his little rook rifle with
him, and I heard one or two shots in the distance." "Where is this little rook rifle now?" "In the hall, I think." She led the way out of the room and found and
handed the little weapon to Poirot, who examined
it cursorily. "Two shots fired, I see," he observed, as he
handed it back. "And now, madame, if I might
see----" He paused delicately. "The servant shall take you," she murmured,
averting her head. The parlourmaid, summoned, led Poirot upstairs.
I remained with the lovely and unfortunate
woman. It was hard to know whether
to speak or remain silent. I essayed one or two
general reflections to which she responded absently,
and in a very few minutes Poirot rejoined
us. "I thank you for all your courtesy, madame.
I do not think you need be troubled any further
with this matter. By the way, do you know anything
of your husband's financial position?" She shook her head. "Nothing whatever. I am very stupid over
business things." "I see. Then you can give us no clue as to
why he suddenly decided to insure his life? He
had not done so previously, I understand." "Well, we had only been married a little over
a year. But, as to why he insured his life, it was
because he had absolutely made up his mind that
he would not live long. He had a strong premonition
of his own death. I gather that he had
had one haemorrhage already, and that he knew
that another one would prove fatal. I tried to
dispel these gloomy fears of his, but without
avail. Alas, he was only too right!" Tears in her eyes, she bade us a dignified farewell.
Poirot made a characteristic gesture as we
walked down the drive together. "Eh bien, that is that! Back to London, my
friend, there appears to be no mouse in this
mouse-hole. And yet----" "Yet what?" "A slight discrepancy, that is all! You
noticed it? You did not? Still, life is full of
discrepancies, and assuredly the man cannot have
taken his own life--there is no poison that would
fill his mouth with blood. No, no, I must resign
myself to the fact that all here is clear and above-board--but
who is this?" A tall young man was striding up the drive
towards us. He passed us without making any
sign, but I noted that he was not ill-looking, with
a lean, deeply bronzed face that spoke of life in a
tropic clime. A gardener who was sweeping up
leaves had paused for a minute in his task, and
Poirot ran quickly up to him. "Tell me, I pray you, who is that gentleman?
Do you know him?" "I don't remember his name, sir, though I did
hear it. He was staying down here last week for
a night. Tuesday, it was." "Quick, mon ami, let us follow him." We hastened up the drive after the retreating
figure. A glimpse of a black-robed figure on the
terrace at the side of the house, and our quarry
swerved and we after him, so that we were witnesses
of the meeting. Mrs. Maltravers almost staggered where she
stood, and her face blanched noticeably. "You," she gasped. "I thought you were
on the sea--on your way to East Africa?" "I got some news from my lawyers that
detained me," explained the young man. "My
old uncle in Scotland died unexpectedly and left
me some money. Under the circumstances I
thought it better to cancel my passage. Then I
saw this bad news in the paper and I came down
to see if there was anything I could do. You'll
want some one to look after things for you a bit
perhaps." At that moment they became aware of our
presence. Poirot stepped forward, and with
many apologies explained that he had left his stick
in the hall. Rather reluctantly, it seemed to me,
Mrs. Maltravers made the necessary introduction. "Monsieur Poirot, Captain Black." A few minutes' chat ensued, in the course of
which Poirot elicited the fact that Captain Black
was putting up at the Anchor Inn. The missing
stick not having been discovered (which was not
surprising), Poirot uttered more apologies and we
withdrew. We returned to the village at a great pace, and
Poirot made a bee line for the Anchor Inn. "Here we establish ourselves until our friend
the Captain returns," he explained. "You
notice that I emphasized the point that we were
returning to London by the first train? Possibly
you thought I meant it. But no--you observed
Mrs. Maltravers' face when she caught sight of
this young Black? She was clearly taken aback,
and he--eh bien, he was very devoted, did you
not think so? And he was here on Tuesday
night--the day before Mr. Maltravers died. We
must investigate the doings of Captain Black,
Hastings." In about half an hour we espied our quarry
approaching the inn. Poirot went out and
accosted him and presently brought him up to
the room we had engaged. "I have been telling Captain Black of the
mission which brings us here," he explained.
"You can understand, monsieur le capitaine,
that I am anxious to arrive at Mr. Maltravers'
state of mind immediately before his death, and
that at the same time I do not wish to distress
Mrs. Maltravers unduly by asking her painful
questions. Now, you were here just before the
occurrence, and can give us equally valuable
information." "I'll do anything I can to help you, I'm sure,"
replied the young soldier; "but I'm afraid I
didn't notice anything out of the ordinary. You
see, although Maltravers was an old friend of
my people's, I didn't know him very well myself." "You came down--when?" "Tuesday afternoon. I went up to town
early Wednesday morning, as my boat sailed from
Tilbury about twelve o'clock. But some news I
got made me alter my plans, as I dare say you
heard me explain to Mrs. Maltravers." "You were returning to East Africa, I understand?" "Yes. I've been out there ever since the
War--a great country." "Exactly. Now what was the talk about at
dinner on Tuesday night?" "Oh, I don't know. The usual odd topics.
Maltravers asked after my people, and then we
discussed the question of German reparations,
and then Mrs. Maltravers asked a lot of questions
about East Africa, and I told them one or two
yarns, that's about all, I think." "Thank you." Poirot was silent for a moment, then he said
gently: "With your permission, I should like
to try a little experiment. You have told us all
that your conscious self knows, I want now to
question your subconscious self." "Psychoanalysis, what?" said Black, with
visible alarm. "Oh, no," said Poirot reassuringly. "You
see, it is like this, I give you a word, you answer
with another, and so on. Any word, the first
one you think of. Shall we begin?" "All right," said Black slowly, but he looked
uneasy. "Note down the words, please, Hastings,"
said Poirot. Then he took from his pocket his
big turnip-faced watch and laid it on the table
beside him. "We will commence. Day." There was a moment's pause, and then Black
replied: "Night." As Poirot proceeded, his answers came quicker. "Name," said Poirot. "Place." "Bernard." "Shaw." "Tuesday." "Dinner." "Journey." "Ship." "Country." "Uganda." "Story." "Lions." "Rook Rifle." "Farm." "Shot." "Suicide." "Elephant." "Tusks." "Money." "Lawyers." "Thank you, Captain Black. Perhaps you
could spare me a few minutes in about half an
hour's time?" "Certainly." The young soldier looked at
him curiously and wiped his brow as he got
up. "And now, Hastings," said Poirot, smiling at
me as the door closed behind him. "You see it
all, do you not?" "I don't know what you mean." "Does that list of words tell you nothing?" I scrutinized it, but was forced to shake my
head. "I will assist you. To begin with, Black
answered well within the normal time limit, with
no pauses, so we can take it that he himself has
no guilty knowledge to conceal. 'Day' to
'Night' and 'Place' to 'Name' are normal
associations. I began work with 'Bernard'
which might have suggested the local doctor had
he come across him at all. Evidently he had
not. After our recent conversation, he gave
'Dinner' to my 'Tuesday,' but 'Journey' and
'Country' were answered by 'Ship' and 'Uganda,'
showing clearly that it was his journey abroad
that was important to him and not the one which
brought him down here. 'Story' recalls to him
one of the 'Lion' stories he told at dinner. I
proceed to 'Rook Rifle' and he answered with
the totally unexpected word 'Farm.' When I
say 'Shot,' he answers at once 'Suicide.' The
association seems clear. A man he knows committed
suicide with a rook rifle on a farm somewhere.
Remember, too, that his mind is
still on the stories he told at dinner, and I
think you will agree that I shall not be far from
the truth if I recall Captain Black and
ask him to repeat the particular suicide story
which he told at the dinner-table on Tuesday
evening." Black was straightforward enough over the
matter. "Yes, I did tell them that story now that I
come to think of it. Chap shot himself on a
farm out there. Did it with a rook rifle through
the roof of the mouth, bullet lodged in the brain.
Doctors were no end puzzled over it--there was
nothing to show except a little blood on the lips.
But what----" "What has it got to do with Mr. Maltravers?
You did not know, I see, that he was found with
a rook rifle by his side." "You mean my story suggested to him--oh,
but that is awful!" "Do not distress yourself--it would have been
one way or another. Well, I must get on the
telephone to London." Poirot had a lengthy conversation over the
wire, and came back thoughtful. He went off
by himself in the afternoon, and it was not till
seven o'clock that he announced that he could
put it off no longer, but must break the news to
the young widow. My sympathy had already
gone out to her unreservedly. To be left penniless,
and with the knowledge that her husband
had killed himself to assure her future was a hard
burden for any woman to bear. I cherished a
secret hope, however, that young Black might
prove capable of consoling her after her first grief
had passed. He evidently admired her enormously. Our interview with the lady was painful. She
refused vehemently to believe the facts that Poirot
advanced, and when she was at last convinced
broke down into bitter weeping. An examination
of the body turned our suspicions into
certainty. Poirot was very sorry for the poor
lady, but, after all, he was employed by the Insurance
Company, and what could he do? As he
was preparing to leave he said gently to Mrs.
Maltravers: "Madame, you of all people should know that
there are no dead!" "What do you mean?" she faltered, her eyes
growing wide. "Have you never taken part in any spiritualistic
seances? You are mediumistic, you know." "I have been told so. But you do not believe
in Spiritualism, surely?" "Madame, I have seen some strange things.
You know that they say in the village that this
house is haunted?" She nodded, and at that moment the parlourmaid
announced that dinner was ready. "Won't you just stay and have something to
eat?" We accepted gratefully, and I felt that our
presence could not but help distract her a little
from her own griefs. We had just finished our soup, when there
was a scream outside the door, and the sound of
breaking crockery. We jumped up. The parlourmaid
appeared, her hand to her heart. "It was a man--standing in the passage." Poirot rushed out, returning quickly. "There is no one there." "Isn't there, sir?" said the parlourmaid
weakly. "Oh, it did give me a start!" "But why?" She dropped her voice to a whisper. "I thought--I thought it was the master--it
looked like 'im." I saw Mrs. Maltravers give a terrified start,
and my mind flew to the old superstition that a
suicide cannot rest. She thought of it too, I am
sure, for a minute later, she caught Poirot's arm
with a scream. "Didn't you hear that? Those three taps on
the window? That's how he always used to tap
when he passed round the house." "The ivy," I cried. "It was the ivy against
the pane." But a sort of terror was gaining on us all. The
parlourmaid was obviously unstrung, and when
the meal was over Mrs. Maltravers besought
Poirot not to go at once. She was clearly terrified
to be left alone. We sat in the little morning-room.
The wind was getting up, and moaning
round the house in an eerie fashion. Twice the
door of the room came unlatched and the door
slowly opened, and each time she clung to me
with a terrified gasp. "Ah, but this door, it is bewitched!" cried
Poirot angrily at last. He got up and shut it
once more, then turned the key in the lock. "I
shall lock it, so!" "Don't do that," she gasped, "if it should
come open now----" And even as she spoke the impossible happened.
The locked door slowly swung open. I
could not see into the passage from where I sat,
but she and Poirot were facing it. She gave one
long shriek as she turned to him. "You saw him--there in the passage?" she
cried. He was staring down at her with a puzzled
face, then shook his head. "I saw him--my husband--you must have
seen him too?" "Madame, I saw nothing. You are not well--unstrung----" "I am perfectly well, I----Oh, God!" Suddenly, without any warning, the lights
quivered and went out. Out of the darkness
came three loud raps. I could hear Mrs. Maltravers
moaning. And then--I saw! The man I had seen on the bed upstairs stood
there facing us, gleaming with a faint ghostly
light. There was blood on his lips, and he held
his right hand out, pointing. Suddenly a brilliant
light seemed to proceed from it. It passed over
Poirot and me, and fell on Mrs. Maltravers. I
saw her white terrified face, and something else! "My God, Poirot!" I cried. "Look at her
hand, her right hand. It's all red!" Her own eyes fell on it, and she collapsed in a
heap on the floor. "Blood," she cried hysterically. "Yes, it's
blood. I killed him. I did it. He was showing
me, and then I put my hand on the trigger and
pressed. Save me from him--save me! he's
come back!" Her voice died away in a gurgle. "Lights," said Poirot briskly. The lights went on as if by magic. "That's it," he continued. "You heard,
Hastings? And you, Everett? Oh, by the
way, this is Mr. Everett, rather a fine member of
the theatrical profession. I 'phoned to him this
afternoon. His make-up is good, isn't it?
Quite like the dead man, and with a pocket torch
and the necessary phosphorescence he made the
proper impression. I shouldn't touch her right
hand if I were you, Hastings. Red paint marks
so. When the lights went out I clasped her
hand, you see. By the way, we mustn't miss our
train. Inspector Japp is outside the window. A
bad night--but he has been able to while away
the time by tapping on the window every now and
then." "You see," continued Poirot, as we walked
briskly through the wind and rain, "there was a
little discrepancy. The doctor seemed to think
the deceased was a Christian Scientist, and who
could have given him that impression but Mrs.
Maltravers? But to us she represented him as
being in a grave state of apprehension about his
own health. Again, why was she so taken aback
by the reappearance of young Black? And
lastly, although I know that convention decrees
that a woman must make a decent pretence of
mourning for her husband, I do not care for such
heavily-rouged eyelids! You did not observe
them, Hastings? No? As I always tell you,
you see nothing!" "Well, there it was. There were the two
possibilities. Did Black's story suggest an ingenious
method of committing suicide to Mr.
Maltravers, or did his other listener, the wife,
see an equally ingenious method of committing
murder? I inclined to the latter view. To
shoot himself in the way indicated, he would
probably have had to pull the trigger with his toe--or
at least so I imagine. Now if Maltravers
had been found with one boot off, we should
almost certainly have heard of it from some one.
An odd detail like that would have been remembered. "No, as I say, I inclined to the view that it
was a case of murder, not suicide, but I realized
that I had not a shadow of proof in support of my
theory. Hence the elaborate little comedy you
saw played to-night." "Even now I don't quite see all the details of
the crime?" I said. "Let us start from the beginning. Here is a
shrewd and scheming woman who, knowing of
her husband's financial debacle and tired of the
elderly mate she has only married for his money,
induces him to insure his life for a large sum, and
then seeks for the means to accomplish her purpose.
An accident gives her that--the young
soldier's strange story. The next afternoon when
monsieur le capitaine, as she thinks, is on the
high seas, she and her husband are strolling round
the grounds. 'What a curious story that was
last night!' she observes. 'Could a man shoot
himself in such a way? Do show me if it is
possible!' The poor fool--he shows her. He
places the end of the rifle in his mouth. She
stoops down, and puts her finger on the trigger,
laughing up at him. 'And now, sir,' she says
saucily, 'supposing I pull the trigger?' "And then--and then, Hastings--she pulls
it!" So far, in the cases which I have recorded,
Poirot's investigations have started from
the central fact, whether murder or robbery, and
have proceeded from thence by a process of
logical deduction to the final triumphant unravelling.
In the events I am now about to chronicle,
a remarkable chain of circumstances led from the
apparently trivial incidents which first attracted
Poirot's attention to the sinister happenings
which completed a most unusual case. I had been spending the evening with an old
friend of mine, Gerald Parker. There had been,
perhaps, about half a dozen people there besides
my host and myself, and the talk fell, as it was
bound to do sooner or later wherever Parker
found himself, on the subject of house-hunting
in London. Houses and flats were Parker's
special hobby. Since the end of the War, he had
occupied at least half a dozen different flats and
maisonnettes. No sooner was he settled anywhere
than he would light unexpectedly upon a
new find, and would forthwith depart bag and
baggage. His moves were nearly always accomplished
at a slight pecuniary gain, for he had a
shrewd business head, but it was sheer love of
the sport that actuated him, and not a desire to
make money at it. We listened to Parker for
some time with the respect of the novice for
the expert. Then it was our turn, and a perfect
babel of tongues was let loose. Finally the floor
was left to Mrs. Robinson, a charming little bride
who was there with her husband. I had never
met them before, as Robinson was only a recent
acquaintance of Parker's. "Talking of flats," she said, "have you heard
of our piece of luck, Mr. Parker? We've got a
flat--at last! In Montagu Mansions." "Well," said Parker, "I've always said there
are plenty of flats--at a price!" "Yes, but this isn't at a price. It's dirt cheap.
Eighty pounds a year!" "But--but Montagu Mansions is just off
Knightsbridge, isn't it? Big handsome building.
Or are you talking of a poor relation of
the same name stuck in the slums somewhere?" "No, it's the Knightsbridge one. That's
what makes it so wonderful." "Wonderful is the word! It's a blinking
miracle. But there must be a catch somewhere.
Big premium, I suppose?" "No premium!" "No prem--oh, hold my head, somebody!"
groaned Parker. "But we've got to buy the furniture," continued
Mrs. Robinson. "Ah!" Parker brisked up. "I knew there
was a catch!" "For fifty pounds. And it's beautifully furnished!" "I give it up," said Parker. "The present
occupants must be lunatics with a taste for
philanthropy." Mrs. Robinson was looking a little troubled.
A little pucker appeared between her dainty
brows. "It is queer, isn't it? You don't think that--that--the
place is haunted?" "Never heard of a haunted flat," declared
Parker decisively. "N-o." Mrs. Robinson appeared far from
convinced. "But there were several things about
it all that struck me as--well, queer." "For instance----" I suggested. "Ah," said Parker, "our criminal expert's
attention is aroused! Unburden yourself to
him, Mrs. Robinson. Hastings is a great unraveller
of mysteries." I laughed, embarrassed but not wholly displeased
with the role thrust upon me. "Oh, not really queer, Captain Hastings, but
when we went to the agents, Stosser and Paul--we
hadn't tried them before because they only
have the expensive Mayfair flats, but we thought
at any rate it would do no harm--everything they
offered us was four and five hundred a year, or
else huge premiums, and then, just as we were
going, they mentioned that they had a flat at
eighty, but that they doubted if it would be any
good our going there, because it had been on
their books some time and they had sent so
many people to see it that it was almost sure to
be taken--'snapped up' as the clerk put it--only
people were so tiresome in not letting them
know, and then they went on sending, and people
get annoyed at being sent to a place that had,
perhaps, been let some time."

 Mrs. Robinson paused for some much needed
breath, and then continued:
"We thanked him, and said that we quite
understood it would probably be no good, but
that we should like an order all the same--just
in case. And we went there straight away in a
taxi, for, after all, you never know. No. 4 was
on the second floor, and just as we were waiting
for the lift, Elsie Ferguson--she's a friend of
mine, Captain Hastings, and they are looking
for a flat too--came hurrying down the stairs.
'Ahead of you for once, my dear,' she said. 'But
it's no good. It's already let.' That seemed to
finish it, but--well, as John said, the place was
very cheap, we could afford to give more, and
perhaps if we offered a premium.----A horrid
thing to do, of course, and I feel quite ashamed
of telling you, but you know what flat-hunting
is." I assured her that I was well aware that in
the struggle for house-room the baser side of
human nature frequently triumphed over the
higher, and that the well-known rule of dog eat
dog always applied. "So we went up and, would you believe it,
the flat wasn't let at all. We were shown over
it by the maid, and then we saw the mistress,
and the thing was settled then and there. Immediate
possession and fifty pounds for the furniture.
We signed the agreement next day, and we
are to move in to-morrow!" Mrs. Robinson
paused triumphantly. "And what about Mrs. Ferguson?" asked
Parker. "Let's have your deductions, Hastings." "'Obvious, my dear Watson,'" I quoted
lightly. "She went to the wrong flat." "Oh, Captain Hastings, how clever of you!"
cried Mrs. Robinson admiringly. I rather wished Poirot had been there. Sometimes
I have the feeling that he rather underestimates
my capabilities. The whole thing was rather amusing, and I
propounded the thing as a mock problem to
Poirot on the following morning. He seemed
interested, and questioned me rather narrowly as
to the rents of flats in various localities. "A curious story," he said thoughtfully.
"Excuse me, Hastings, I must take a short
stroll." When he returned, about an hour later, his
eyes were gleaming with a peculiar excitement.
He laid his stick on the table, and brushed the
nap of his hat with his usual tender care before
he spoke. "It is as well, mon ami, that we have no affairs
of moment on hand. We can devote ourselves
wholly to the present investigation." "What investigation are you talking about?" "The remarkable cheapness of your friend's,
Mrs. Robinson's, new flat." "Poirot, you are not serious!" "I am most serious. Figure to yourself, my
friend, that the real rent of those flats is PS350.
I have just ascertained that from the landlord's
agents. And yet this particular flat is being
sublet at eighty pounds! Why?" "There must be something wrong with it.
Perhaps it is haunted, as Mrs. Robinson suggested." Poirot shook his head in a dissatisfied manner. "Then again how curious it is that her friend
tells her the flat is let, and, when she goes up,
behold, it is not so at all!" "But surely you agree with me that the other
woman must have gone to the wrong flat. That
is the only possible solution." "You may or may not be right on that point,
Hastings. The fact still remains that numerous
other applicants were sent to see it, and yet, in
spite of its remarkable cheapness, it was still in
the market when Mrs. Robinson arrived." "That shows that there must be something
wrong about it." "Mrs. Robinson did not seem to notice anything
amiss. Very curious, is it not? Did she
impress you as being a truthful woman, Hastings?" "She was a delightful creature!" "Evidemment! since she renders you incapable
of replying to my question. Describe her
to me, then." "Well, she's tall and fair; her hair's really
a beautiful shade of auburn----" "Always you have had a penchant for
auburn hair!" murmured Poirot. "But continue." "Blue eyes and a very nice complexion and--well,
that's all, I think," I concluded lamely. "And her husband?" "Oh, he's quite a nice fellow--nothing startling." "Dark or fair?" "I don't know--betwixt and between, and
just an ordinary sort of face." Poirot nodded. "Yes, there are hundreds of these average
men--and, anyway, you bring more sympathy
and appreciation to your description of women.
Do you know anything about these people?
Does Parker know them well." "They are just recent acquaintances, I believe.
But surely, Poirot, you don't think for an instant----" Poirot raised his hand. "Tout doucement, mon ami. Have I said that
I think anything? All I say is--it is a curious
story. And there is nothing to throw light upon
it; except perhaps the lady's name, eh, Hastings?" "Her name is Stella," I said stiffly, "but I
don't see----" Poirot interrupted me with a tremendous chuckle.
Something seemed to be amusing him vastly. "And Stella means a star, does it not?
Famous!" "What on earth----" "And stars give light! Voila! Calm yourself,
Hastings. Do not put on that air of injured
dignity. Come, we will go to Montagu Mansions
and make a few inquiries." I accompanied him, nothing loath. The
Mansions were a handsome block of buildings in
excellent repair. A uniformed porter was sunning
himself on the threshold, and it was to him
that Poirot addressed himself: "Pardon, but could you tell me if a Mr. and
Mrs. Robinson reside here?" The porter was a man of few words and apparently
of a sour or suspicious disposition. He
hardly looked at us and grunted out: "No. 4. Second floor." "I thank you. Can you tell me how long
they have been here?" "Six months." I started forward in amazement, conscious as
I did so of Poirot's malicious grin. "Impossible," I cried. "You must be making
a mistake." "Six months." "Are you sure? The lady I mean is tall and
fair with reddish gold hair and----" "That's 'er," said the porter. "Come in the
Michaelmas quarter, they did. Just six months
ago." He appeared to lose interest in us and retreated
slowly up the hall. I followed Poirot outside. "Eh bien, Hastings?" my friend demanded
slyly. "Are you so sure now that delightful
women always speak the truth?" I did not reply. Poirot had steered his way into Brompton
Road before I asked him what he was going to
do and where we were going. "To the house agents, Hastings. I have a
great desire to have a flat in Montagu Mansions.
If I am not mistaken, several interesting things
will take place there before long." We were fortunate in our quest. No. 8, on
the fourth floor, was to be let furnished at ten
guineas a week. Poirot promptly took it for a
month. Outside in the street again, he silenced
my protests: "But I make money nowadays! Why should
I not indulge a whim? By the way, Hastings,
have you a revolver?" "Yes--somewhere," I answered, slightly
thrilled. "Do you think----" "That you will need it? It is quite possible.
The idea pleases you, I see. Always the spectacular
and romantic appeals to you." The following day saw us installed in our
temporary home. The flat was pleasantly furnished.
It occupied the same position in the
building as that of the Robinsons, but was two
floors higher. The day after our installation was a Sunday.
In the afternoon, Poirot left the front door ajar,
and summoned me hastily as a bang reverberated
from somewhere below. "Look over the banisters. Are those your
friends. Do not let them see you." I craned my neck over the staircase. "That's them," I declared in an ungrammatical
whisper. "Good. Wait awhile." About half an hour later, a young woman
emerged in brilliant and varied clothing. With a
sigh of satisfaction, Poirot tiptoed back into the
flat. "C'est ca. After the master and mistress, the
maid. The flat should now be empty." "What are we going to do?" I asked uneasily. Poirot had trotted briskly into the scullery
and was hauling at the rope of the coal-lift. "We are about to descend after the method
of the dustbins," he explained cheerfully. "No
one will observe us. The Sunday concert, the
Sunday 'afternoon out,' and finally the Sunday
nap after the Sunday dinner of England--le
rosbif--all these will distract attention from the
doings of Hercule Poirot. Come, my friend." He stepped into the rough wooden contrivance
and I followed him gingerly. "Are we going to break into the flat?" I
asked dubiously. Poirot's answer was not too reassuring: "Not precisely to-day," he replied. Pulling on the rope, we descended slowly till
we reached the second floor. Poirot uttered an
exclamation of satisfaction as he perceived that
the wooden door into the scullery was open. "You observe? Never do they bolt these
doors in the daytime. And yet anyone could
mount or descend as we have done. At night
yes--though not always then--and it is against
that that we are going to make provision." He had drawn some tools from his pocket as
he spoke, and at once set deftly to work, his
object being to arrange the bolt so that it could
be pulled back from the lift. The operation
only occupied about three minutes. Then Poirot
returned the tools to his pocket, and we reascended
once more to our own domain. On Monday Poirot was out all day, but when
he returned in the evening he flung himself into
his chair with a sigh of satisfaction. "Hastings, shall I recount to you a little history?
A story after your own heart and which
will remind you of your favourite cinema?" "Go ahead," I laughed. "I presume that it
is a true story, not one of your efforts of fancy." "It is true enough. Inspector Japp of Scotland
Yard will vouch for its accuracy, since it
was through his kind offices that it came to my
ears. Listen, Hastings. A little over six months
ago some important Naval plans were stolen from
an American Government department. They
showed the position of some of the most important
Harbour defences, and would be worth a considerable
sum to any foreign Government--that
of Japan, for example. Suspicion fell upon a
young man named Luigi Valdarno, an Italian by
birth, who was employed in a minor capacity in
the Department and who was missing at the same
time as the papers. Whether Luigi Valdarno
was the thief or not, he was found two days later
on the East Side in New York, shot dead. The
papers were not on him. Now for some time
past Luigi Valdarno had been going about with
a Miss Elsa Hardt, a young concert singer who
had recently appeared and who lived with a
brother in an apartment in Washington. Nothing
was known of the antecedents of Miss
Elsa Hardt, and she disappeared suddenly about
the time of Valdarno's death. There are reasons
for believing that she was in reality an accomplished
international spy who has done much
nefarious work under various aliases. The
American Secret Service, whilst doing their best
to trace her, also kept an eye upon certain insignificant
Japanese gentlemen living in Washington.
They felt pretty certain that, when Elsa Hardt
had covered her tracks sufficiently, she would
approach the gentlemen in question. One of
them left suddenly for England a fortnight ago.
On the face of it, therefore, it would seem that
Elsa Hardt is in England." Poirot paused, and
then added softly: "The official description of
Elsa Hardt is: Height 5 ft. 7, eyes blue, hair
auburn, fair complexion, nose straight, no special
distinguishing marks." "Mrs. Robinson!" I gasped. "Well, there is a chance of it, anyhow,"
amended Poirot. "Also, I learn that a swarthy
man, a foreigner of some kind, was inquiring
about the occupants of No. 4 only this morning.
Therefore, mon ami, I fear that you must forswear
your beauty sleep to-night, and join me in my
all-night vigil in the flat below--armed with that
excellent revolver of yours, bien entendu!" "Rather," I cried with enthusiasm. "When
shall we start?" "The hour of midnight is both solemn and
suitable, I fancy. Nothing is likely to occur
before then." At twelve o'clock precisely, we crept cautiously
into the coal-lift and lowered ourselves to the
second floor. Under Poirot's manipulation, the
wooden door quickly swung inwards, and we
climbed into the flat. From the scullery we
passed into the kitchen where we established ourselves
comfortably in two chairs with the door
into the hall ajar. "Now we have but to wait," said Poirot contentedly,
closing his eyes. To me, the waiting appeared endless. I was
terrified of going to sleep. Just when it seemed
to me that I had been there about eight hours--and
had, as I found out afterwards, in reality
been exactly one hour and twenty minutes--a
faint scratching sound came to my ears. Poirot's
hand touched mine. I rose, and together we
moved carefully in the direction of the hall. The
noise came from there. Poirot placed his lips
to my ear. "Outside the front door. They are cutting
out the lock. When I give the word, not before,
fall upon him from behind and hold him fast.
Be careful, he will have a knife." Presently there was a rending sound, and a
little circle of light appeared through the door.
It was extinguished immediately and then the
door was slowly opened. Poirot and I flattened
ourselves against the wall. I heard a man's
breathing as he passed us. Then he flashed on
his torch, and as he did so, Poirot hissed in my
ear: "Allez." We sprang together, Poirot with a quick
movement enveloped the intruder's head with a
light woollen scarf whilst I pinioned his arms.
The whole affair was quick and noiseless. I
twisted a dagger from his hand, and as Poirot
brought down the scarf from his eyes, whilst
keeping it wound tightly round his mouth, I
jerked up my revolver where he could see it
and understand that resistance was useless. As
he ceased to struggle Poirot put his mouth close
to his ear and began to whisper rapidly. After
a minute the man nodded. Then enjoining
silence with a movement of the hand, Poirot led
the way out of the flat and down the stairs. Our
captive followed, and I brought up the rear with
the revolver. When we were out in the street,
Poirot turned to me. "There is a taxi waiting just round the corner.
Give me the revolver. We shall not need it now." "But if this fellow tries to escape?" Poirot smiled. "He will not." I returned in a minute with the waiting taxi.
The scarf had been unwound from the stranger's
face, and I gave a start of surprise. "He's not a Jap," I ejaculated in a whisper
to Poirot. "Observation was always your strong point,
Hastings! Nothing escapes you. No, the man
is not a Jap. He is an Italian." We got into the taxi, and Poirot gave the
driver an address in St. John's Wood. I was
by now completely fogged. I did not like to ask
Poirot where we were going in front of our captive,
and strove in vain to obtain some light upon
the proceedings. We alighted at the door of a small house standing
back from the road. A returning wayfarer,
slightly drunk, was lurching along the pavement
and almost collided with Poirot, who said something
sharply to him which I did not catch. All
three of us went up the steps of the house. Poirot
rang the bell and motioned us to stand a little
aside. There was no answer and he rang again
and then seized the knocker which he plied for
some minutes vigorously. A light appeared suddenly above the fanlight,
and the door was opened cautiously a little way. "What the devil do you want?" a man's
voice demanded harshly. "I want the doctor. My wife is taken ill." "There's no doctor here." The man prepared to shut the door, but Poirot
thrust his foot in adroitly. He became suddenly
a perfect caricature of an infuriated Frenchman. "What you say, there is no doctor? I will
have the law of you. You must come! I will
stay here and ring and knock all night." "My dear sir----" The door was opened
again, the man, clad in a dressing-gown and
slippers, stepped forward to pacify Poirot with
an uneasy glance round. "I will call the police." Poirot prepared to descend the steps. "No, don't do that for Heaven's sake!"
The man dashed after him. With a neat push Poirot sent him staggering
down the steps. In another minute all three of
us were inside the door and it was pushed to
and bolted. "Quick--in here." Poirot led the way into
the nearest room switching on the light as he
did so. "And you--behind the curtain." "Si, signor," said the Italian and slid rapidly
behind the full folds of rose-coloured velvet which
draped the embrasure of the window. Not a minute too soon. Just as he disappeared
from view a woman rushed into the room. She
was tall with reddish hair and held a scarlet
kimono round her slender form. "Where is my husband?" she cried, with a
quick frightened glance. "Who are you?" Poirot stepped forward with a bow. "It is to be hoped your husband will not
suffer from a chill. I observed that he had
slippers on his feet, and that his dressing-gown
was a warm one." "Who are you? What are you doing in my
house?" "It is true that none of us have the pleasure
of your acquaintance, madame. It is especially
to be regretted as one of our number has come
specially from New York in order to meet
you." The curtains parted and the Italian stepped
out. To my horror I observed that he was
brandishing my revolver, which Poirot must
doubtless have put down through inadvertence
in the cab. The woman gave a piercing scream and turned
to fly, but Poirot was standing in front of the
closed door. "Let me by," she shrieked. "He will
murder me." "Who was it dat croaked Luigi Valdarno?"
asked the Italian hoarsely, brandishing the
weapon, and sweeping each one of us with it.
We dared not move. "My God, Poirot, this is awful. What shall
we do?" I cried. "You will oblige me by refraining from talking
so much, Hastings. I can assure you that our
friend will not shoot until I give the word." "Youse sure o' dat, eh?" said the Italian,
leering unpleasantly. It was more than I was, but the woman turned
to Poirot like a flash. "What is it you want?" Poirot bowed. "I do not think it is necessary to insult Miss
Elsa Hardt's intelligence by telling her." With a swift movement, the woman snatched
up a big black velvet cat which served as a cover
for the telephone. "They are stitched in the lining of that." "Clever," murmured Poirot appreciatively.
He stood aside from the door. "Good evening,
madame. I will detain your friend from New
York whilst you make your getaway." "Whatta fool!" roared the big Italian, and
raising the revolver he fired point-blank at the
woman's retreating figure just as I flung myself
upon him. But the weapon merely clicked harmlessly and
Poirot's voice rose in mild reproof. "Never will you trust your old friend, Hastings.
I do not care for my friends to carry
loaded pistols about with them and never would
I permit a mere acquaintance to do so. No, no,
mon ami." This to the Italian who swearing
hoarsely. Poirot continued to address him in a
tone of mild reproof: "See now, what I have done
for you. I have saved you from being hanged.
And do not think that our beautiful lady will escape.
No, no, the house is watched, back and front.
Straight into the arms of the police they will go.
Is not that a beautiful and consoling thought?
Yes, you may leave the room now. But be careful--be
very careful. I----Ah, he is gone! And
my friend Hastings looks at me with eyes of
reproach. But it was all so simple! It was
clear, from the first, that out of several hundred,
probably, applicants for No. 4, Montagu Mansions
only the Robinsons were considered suitable.
Why? What was there that singled them
out from the rest--at practically a glance. Their
appearance? Possibly, but it was not so unusual.
Their name, then!" "But there's nothing unusual about the name
of Robinson," I cried. "It's quite a common
name." "Ah! Sapristi, but exactly! That was the
point. Elsa Hardt and her husband, or brother
or whatever he really is, come from New York,
and take a flat in the name of Mr. and Mrs.
Robinson. Suddenly they learn that one of these
secret societies, the Mafia, or the Camorra, to
which doubtless Luigi Valdarno belonged, is on
their track. What do they do? They hit on a
scheme of transparent simplicity. Evidently
they knew that their pursuers were not personally
acquainted with either of them. What then can
be simpler? They offer the flat at an absurdly
low rental. Of the thousands of young couples
in London looking for flats, there cannot fail to
be several Robinsons. It is only a matter of
waiting. If you will look at the name of Robinson
in the telephone directory, you will realize that
a fair-haired Mrs. Robinson was pretty sure to
come along sooner or later. Then what will
happen? The avenger arrives. He knows the
name, he knows the address. He strikes! All
is over, vengeance is satisfied, and Miss Elsa
Hardt has escaped by the skin of her teeth once
more. By the way, Hastings, you must present
me to the real Mrs. Robinson--that delightful
and truthful creature! What will they think
when they find their flat has been broken into!
We must hurry back. Ah, that sounds like Japp
and his friends arriving." A mighty tattoo sounded on the knocker. "How did you know this address?" I asked
as I followed Poirot out into the hall. "Oh, of
course, you had the first Mrs. Robinson followed
when she left the other flat." "A la bonne heure, Hastings. You use your
grey cells at last. Now for a little surprise for
Japp." Softly unbolting the door, he stuck the cat's
head round the edge and ejaculated a piercing
"Miaow." The Scotland Yard inspector, who was standing
outside with another man, jumped in spite of
himself. "Oh, it's only Monsieur Poirot at one of his
little jokes!" he exclaimed, as Poirot's head
followed that of the cat. "Let us in, moosior." "You have our friends safe and sound?" "Yes, we've got the birds all right. But
they hadn't got the goods with them." "I see. So you come to search. Well, I am
about to depart with Hastings, but I should like
to give you a little lecture upon the history and
habits of the domestic cat." "For the Lord's sake, have you gone completely
balmy?" "The cat," declaimed Poirot, "was worshipped
by the ancient Egyptians. It is still regarded as
a symbol of good luck if a black cat crosses your
path. This cat crossed your path to-night, Japp.
To speak of the interior of any animal or any
person is not, I know, considered polite in England.
But the interior of this cat is perfectly
delicate. I refer to the lining." With a sudden grunt, the second man seized
the cat from Poirot's hand. "Oh, I forgot to introduce you," said Japp.
"Mr. Poirot, this is Mr. Burt of the United
States Secret Service." The American's trained fingers had felt what
he was looking for. He held out his hand, and
for a moment speech failed him. Then he rose
to the occasion. "Pleased to meet you," said Mr. Burt. "After all," murmured Poirot, "it is
possible that I shall not die this time." Coming from a convalescent influenza patient,
I hailed the remark as showing a beneficial optimism.
I myself had been the first sufferer from
the disease. Poirot in his turn had gone down.
He was now sitting up in bed, propped up with
pillows, his head muffled in a woollen shawl, and
was slowly sipping a particularly noxious tisane
which I had prepared according to his directions.
His eye rested with pleasure upon a neatly graduated
row of medicine bottles which adorned
the mantelpiece. "Yes, yes," my little friend continued.
"Once more shall I be myself again, the great
Hercule Poirot, the terror of evil-doers! Figure
to yourself, mon ami, that I have a little paragraph
to myself in Society Gossip. But yes! Here it
is! 'Go it--criminals--all out! Hercule Poirot--and
believe me, girls, he's some Hercules!--our
own pet society detective can't get a grip
on you. 'Cause why? 'Cause he's got la grippe
himself'!" I laughed. "Good for you, Poirot. You are becoming
quite a public character. And fortunately you
haven't missed anything of particular interest
during this time." "That is true. The few cases I have had to
decline did not fill me with any regret." Our landlady stuck her head in at the door. "There's a gentleman downstairs. Says he
must see Monsieur Poirot or you, Captain. Seeing
as he was in a great to-do--and with all that
quite the gentleman--I brought up 'is card." She handed me the bit of pasteboard. "Mr.
Roger Havering," I read. Poirot motioned with his head towards the
bookcase, and I obediently pulled forth "Who's
Who." Poirot took it from me and scanned the
pages rapidly. "Second son of fifth Baron Windsor. Married
1913 Zoe, fourth daughter of William Crabb." "H'm!" I said. "I rather fancy that's the
girl who used to act at the Frivolity--only she
called herself Zoe Carrisbrook. I remember she
married some young man about town just before
the War." "Would it interest you, Hastings, to go down
and hear what our visitor's particular little trouble
is? Make him all my excuses." Roger Havering was a man of about forty,
well set up and of smart appearance. His face,
however, was haggard, and he was evidently
labouring under great agitation. "Captain Hastings? You are Monsieur
Poirot's partner, I understand. It is imperative
that he should come with me to Derbyshire
to-day." "I'm afraid that's impossible," I replied.
"Poirot is ill in bed--influenza." His face fell. "Dear me, that is a great blow to me." "The matter on which you want to consult
him is serious?" "My God, yes! My uncle, the best friend
I have in the world, was foully murdered last
night." "Here in London?" "No, in Derbyshire. I was in town and
received a telegram from my wife this morning.
Immediately upon its receipt I determined to
come round and beg Monsieur Poirot to undertake
the case." "If you will excuse me a minute," I said,
struck by a sudden idea. I rushed upstairs, and in a few brief words
acquainted Poirot with the situation. He took
any further words out of my mouth. "I see. I see. You want to go yourself, is
it not so? Well, why not? You should know
my methods by now. All I ask is that you should
report to me fully every day, and follow implicitly
any instructions I may wire you." To this I willingly agreed. An hour later I was sitting opposite Mr. Havering
in a first-class carriage on the Midland Railway,
speeding rapidly away from London. "To begin with, Captain Hastings, you must
understand that Hunter's Lodge, where we are
going, and where the tragedy took place, is only
a small shooting-box in the heart of the Derbyshire
moors. Our real home is near Newmarket,
and we usually rent a flat in town for the season.
Hunter's Lodge is looked after by a housekeeper
who is quite capable of doing all we need when
we run down for an occasional week-end. Of
course, during the shooting season, we take down
some of our own servants from Newmarket.
My uncle, Mr. Harrington Pace (as you may
know, my mother was a Miss Pace of New York),
has, for the last three years, made his home with
us. He never got on well with my father, or
my elder brother, and I suspect that my being
somewhat of a prodigal son myself rather increased
than diminished his affection towards me. Of
course I am a poor man, and my uncle was a
rich one--in other words, he paid the piper!
But, though exacting in many ways, he was not
really hard to get on with, and we all three lived
very harmoniously together. Two days ago my
uncle, rather wearied with some recent gaieties
of ours in town, suggested that we should run
down to Derbyshire for a day or two. My wife
telegraphed to Mrs. Middleton, the housekeeper,
and we went down that same afternoon. Yesterday
evening I was forced to return to town, but
my wife and my uncle remained on. This morning
I received this telegram." He handed it
over to me: "Come at once uncle Harrington murdered
last night bring good detective if you can but
do come--Zoe." "Then, as yet you know no details?" "No, I suppose it will be in the evening
papers. Without doubt the police are in charge." It was about three o'clock when we arrived at
the little station of Elmer's Dale. From there
a five-mile drive brought us to a small grey stone
building in the midst of the rugged moors. "A lonely place," I observed with a shiver. Havering nodded. "I shall try and get rid of it. I could never
live here again." We unlatched the gate and were walking up
the narrow path to the oak door when a familiar
figure emerged and came to meet us. "Japp!" I ejaculated. The Scotland Yard inspector grinned at me in
a friendly fashion before addressing my companion. "Mr. Havering, I think? I've been sent
down from London to take charge of this case,
and I'd like a word with you, if I may, sir." "My wife----" "I've seen your good lady, sir--and the housekeeper.
I won't keep you a moment, but I'm
anxious to get back to the village now that I've
seen all there is to see here." "I know nothing as yet as to what----" "Ex-actly," said Japp soothingly. "But there
are just one or two little points I'd like your
opinion about all the same. Captain Hastings
here, he knows me, and he'll go on up to the
house and tell them you're coming. What have
you done with the little man, by the way, Captain
Hastings?" "He's ill in bed with influenza." "Is he now? I'm sorry to hear that. Rather
the case of the cart without the horse, your being
here without him, isn't it?" And on his rather ill-timed jest I went on to
the house. I rang the bell, as Japp had closed
the door behind him. After some moments it
was opened to me by a middle-aged woman in
black. "Mr. Havering will be here in a moment,"
I explained. "He has been detained by the
inspector. I have come down with him from
London to look into the case. Perhaps you can
tell me briefly what occurred last night." "Come inside, sir." She closed the door
behind me, and we stood in the dimly-lighted
hall. "It was after dinner last night, sir, that
the man came. He asked to see Mr. Pace, sir,
and, seeing that he spoke the same way, I thought
it was an American gentleman friend of Mr.
Pace's and I showed him into the gun-room,
and then went to tell Mr. Pace. He wouldn't
give any name, which, of course, was a bit odd,
now I come to think of it. I told Mr. Pace,
and he seemed puzzled like, but he said to the
mistress: 'Excuse me, Zoe, while I just see
what this fellow wants.' He went off to the
gun-room, and I went back to the kitchen, but
after a while I heard loud voices, as if they were
quarrelling, and I came out into the hall. At
the same time, the mistress she comes out too,
and just then there was a shot and then a dreadful
silence. We both ran to the gun-room door,
but it was locked and we had to go round to
the window. It was open, and there inside was
Mr. Pace, all shot and bleeding." "What became of the man?" "He must have got away through the window,
sir, before we got to it." "And then?" "Mrs. Havering sent me to fetch the police.
Five miles to walk it was. They came back with
me, and the constable he stayed all night, and
this morning the police gentleman from London
arrived." "What was this man like who called to see
Mr. Pace?" The housekeeper reflected. "He had a black beard, sir, and was about
middle-aged, and had on a light overcoat. Beyond
the fact that he spoke like an American I
didn't notice much about him." "I see. Now I wonder if I can see Mrs.
Havering?" "She's upstairs, sir. Shall I tell her?" "If you please. Tell her that Mr. Havering
is outside with Inspector Japp, and that the
gentleman he has brought back with him from
London is anxious to speak to her as soon as
possible." "Very good, sir." I was in a fever of impatience to get at all the
facts. Japp had two or three hours' start of me,
and his anxiety to be gone made me keen to be
close at his heels. Mrs. Havering did not keep me waiting
long. In a few minutes I heard a light step
descending the stairs, and looked up to see a
very handsome young woman coming towards
me. She wore a flame-coloured jumper, that set
off the slender boyishness of her figure. On her
dark head was a little hat of flame-coloured
leather. Even the present tragedy could not
dim the vitality of her personality. I introduced myself, and she nodded in quick
comprehension. "Of course I have often heard of you and
your colleague, Monsieur Poirot. You have
done some wonderful things together, haven't
you? It was very clever of my husband to get
you so promptly. Now will you ask me questions?
That is the easiest way, isn't it, of getting
to know all you want to about this dreadful
affair?" "Thank you, Mrs. Havering. Now what
time was it that this man arrived?" "It must have been just before nine o'clock.
We had finished dinner, and were sitting over
our coffee and cigarettes." "Your husband had already left for London?" "Yes, he went up by the 6.15." "Did he go by car to the station, or did he
walk?" "Our own car isn't down here. One came
out from the garage in Elmer's Dale to fetch
him in time for the train." "Was Mr. Pace quite his usual self?" "Absolutely. Most normal in every way." "Now, can you describe this visitor at all?" "I'm afraid not. I didn't see him. Mrs.
Middleton showed him straight into the gun-room
and then came to tell my uncle." "What did your uncle say?" "He seemed rather annoyed, but went off at
once. It was about five minutes later that I
heard the sound of raised voices. I ran out into
the hall and almost collided with Mrs. Middleton.
Then we heard the shot. The gun-room door
was locked on the inside, and we had to go right
round the house to the window. Of course that
took some time, and the murderer had been able
to get well away. My poor uncle"--her voice
faltered--"had been shot through the head. I
saw at once that he was dead. I sent Mrs.
Middleton for the police. I was careful to touch
nothing in the room but to leave it exactly as I
found it." I nodded approval. "Now, as to the weapon?" "Well, I can make a guess at it, Captain
Hastings. A pair of revolvers of my husband's
were mounted upon the wall. One of them is
missing. I pointed this out to the police, and
they took the other one away with them. When
they have extracted the bullet, I suppose they
will know for certain." "May I go to the gun-room?" "Certainly. The police have finished with
it. But the body has been removed." She accompanied me to the scene of the crime.
At that moment Havering entered the hall, and
with a quick apology his wife ran to him. I was
left to undertake my investigations alone. I may as well confess at once that they were
rather disappointing. In detective novels clues
abound, but here I could find nothing that struck
me as out of the ordinary except a large bloodstain
on the carpet where I judged the dead man
had fallen. I examined everything with painstaking
care and took a couple of pictures of the
room with my little camera which I had brought
with me. I also examined the ground outside
the window, but it appeared to have been so
heavily trampled underfoot that I judged it was
useless to waste time over it. No, I had seen
all that Hunter's Lodge had to show me. I
must go back to Elmer's Dale and get into touch
with Japp. Accordingly I took leave of the
Haverings, and was driven off in the car that
had brought us up from the station. I found Japp at the Matlock Arms and he
took me forthwith to see the body. Harrington
Pace was a small, spare clean-shaven man, typically
American in appearance. He had been
shot through the back of the head, and the revolver
had been discharged at close quarters. "Turned away for a moment," remarked
Japp, "and the other fellow snatched up a
revolver and shot him. The one Mrs. Havering
handed over to us was fully loaded and I suppose
the other one was also. Curious what darn fool
things people do. Fancy keeping two loaded
revolvers hanging up on your wall." "What do you think of the case?" I asked,
as we left the gruesome chamber behind us. "Well, I'd got my eye on Havering to begin
with. Oh, yes!" noting my exclamation of
astonishment. "Havering has one or two shady
incidents in his past. When he was a boy at
Oxford there was some funny business about the
signature on one of his father's cheques. All
hushed up of course. Then, he's pretty heavily
in debt now, and they're the kind of debts he
wouldn't like to go to his uncle about, whereas
you may be sure the uncle's will would be in
his favour. Yes, I'd got my eye on him, and
that's why I wanted to speak to him before he
saw his wife, but their statements dovetail all
right, and I've been to the station and there's no
doubt whatever that he left by the 6.15. That
gets up to London about 10.30. He went
straight to his club, he says, and if that's confirmed
all right--why, he couldn't have been shooting
his uncle here at nine o'clock in a black
beard!" "Ah, yes, I was going to ask you what you
thought about that beard?" Japp winked. "I think it grew pretty fast--grew in the five
miles from Elmer's Dale to Hunter's Lodge.
Americans that I've met are mostly clean-shaven.
Yes, it's amongst Mr. Pace's American associates
that we'll have to look for the murderer. I
questioned the housekeeper first, and then her
mistress, and their stories agree all right, but
I'm sorry Mrs. Havering didn't get a look at
the fellow. She's a smart woman, and she might
have noticed something that would set us on the
track." I sat down and wrote a minute and lengthy
account to Poirot. I was able to add various
further items of information before I posted the
letter. The bullet had been extracted and was proved
to have been fired from a revolver identical with
the one held by the police. Furthermore, Mr.
Havering's movements on the night in question
had been checked and verified, and it was proved
beyond doubt that he had actually arrived in
London by the train in question. And, thirdly,
a sensational development had occurred. A city
gentleman, living at Ealing, on crossing Haven
Green to get to the District Railway Station that
morning, had observed a brown-paper parcel
stuck between the railings. Opening it, he found
that it contained a revolver. He handed the
parcel over to the local police station, and before
night it was proved to be the one we were in
search of, the fellow to that given us by Mrs.
Havering. One bullet had been fired from it. All this I added to my report. A wire from
Poirot arrived whilst I was at breakfast the following
morning: "Of course black bearded man was not Havering
only you or Japp would have such an idea
wire me description of housekeeper and what
clothes she wore this morning same of Mrs.
Havering do not waste time taking photographs
of interiors they are underexposed and not in the
least artistic." It seemed to me that Poirot's style was unnecessarily
facetious. I also fancied he was a shade
jealous of my position on the spot with full facilities
for handling the case. His request for a
description of the clothes worn by the two women
appeared to me to be simply ridiculous, but I
complied as well as I, a mere man, was able to. At eleven a reply wire came from Poirot: "Advise Japp arrest housekeeper before it is
too late." Dumbfounded, I took the wire to Japp. He
swore softly under his breath. "He's the goods, Monsieur Poirot! If he
says so, there's something in it. And I hardly
noticed the woman. I don't know that I can go
so far as arresting her, but I'll have her watched.
We'll go up right away, and take another look
at her." But it was too late. Mrs. Middleton, that
quiet middle-aged woman, who had appeared so
normal and respectable, had vanished into thin
air. Her box had been left behind. It contained
only ordinary wearing apparel. There
was no clue in it to her identity, or as to her
whereabouts. From Mrs. Havering we elicited all the facts
we could: "I engaged her about three weeks ago when
Mrs. Emery, our former housekeeper, left. She
came to me from Mrs. Selbourne's Agency in
Mount Street--a very well-known place. I get
all my servants from there. They sent several
women to see me, but this Mrs. Middleton
seemed much the nicest, and had splendid references.
I engaged her on the spot, and notified
the Agency of the fact. I can't believe that there
was anything wrong with her. She was such a
nice quiet woman." The thing was certainly a mystery. Whilst it
was clear that the woman herself could not have
committed the crime, since at the moment the
shot was fired Mrs. Havering was with her in
the hall, nevertheless she must have some connection
with the murder, or why should she
suddenly take to her heels and bolt?
I wired the latest development to Poirot and
suggested returning to London and making
inquiries at Selbourne's Agency. Poirot's reply was prompt: "Useless to inquire at agency they will never
have heard of her find out what vehicle took her
up to hunters lodge when she first arrived there." Though mystified, I was obedient. The means
of transport in Elmer's Dale were limited. The
local garage had two battered Ford cars, and
there were two station flies. None of these had
been requisitioned on the date in question. Questioned,
Mrs. Havering explained that she had
given the woman the money for her fare down
to Derbyshire and sufficient to hire a car or fly
to take her up to Hunter's Lodge. There was
usually one of the Fords at the station on the
chance of its being required. Taking into consideration
the further fact that nobody at the
station had noticed the arrival of a stranger,
black-bearded or otherwise, on the fatal evening,
everything seemed to point to the conclusion
that the murderer had come to the spot in a car,
which had been waiting near at hand to aid his
escape, and that the same car had brought the
mysterious housekeeper to her new post. I may
mention that inquiries at the Agency in London
bore out Poirot's prognostication. No such
woman as "Mrs. Middleton" had ever been on
their books. They had received the Hon. Mrs.
Havering's application for a housekeeper, and
had sent her various applicants for the post.
When she sent them the engagement fee, she
omitted to mention which woman she had selected. Somewhat crestfallen, I returned to London.
I found Poirot established in an arm-chair by the
fire in a garish, silk dressing-gown. He greeted
me with much affection. "Mon ami Hastings! But how glad I am to
see you. Veritably I have for you a great affection.
And you have enjoyed yourself? You
have run to and fro with the good Japp? You
have interrogated and investigated to your heart's
content?" "Poirot," I cried, "the thing's a dark mystery!
It will never be solved." "It is true that we are not likely to cover
ourselves with glory over it." "No, indeed. It's a hard nut to crack." "Oh, as far as that goes, I am very good at
cracking the nuts! A veritable squirrel! It is
not that which embarrasses me. I know well
enough who killed Mr. Harrington Pace." "You know? How did you find out?" "Your illuminating answers to my wires supplied
me with the truth. See here, Hastings,
let us examine the facts methodically and in
order. Mr. Harrington Pace is a man with a
considerable fortune which at his death will doubtless
pass to his nephew. Point No. 1. His
nephew is known to be desperately hard up.
Point No. 2. His nephew is also known to be--shall
we say a man of rather loose moral fibre?
Point No. 3." "But Roger Havering is proved to have
journeyed straight up to London." "Precisement--and therefore, as Mr. Havering
left Elmer's Dale at 6.15, and since Mr. Pace
cannot have been killed before he left, or the
doctor would have spotted the time of the crime
as being given wrongly when he examined the
body, we conclude quite rightly, that Mr. Havering
did not shoot his uncle. But there is a Mrs.
Havering, Hastings." "Impossible! The housekeeper was with
her when the shot was fired." "Ah, yes, the housekeeper. But she has
disappeared." "She will be found." "I think not. There is something peculiarly
elusive about that housekeeper, don't you think
so, Hastings? It struck me at once." "She played her part, I suppose, and then got
out in the nick of time." "And what was her part?" "Well, presumably to admit her confederate,
the black-bearded man." "Oh, no, that was not her part! Her part
was what you have just mentioned, to provide
an alibi for Mrs. Havering at the moment the
shot was fired. And no one will ever find her,
mon ami, because she does not exist! 'There's
no sech person,' as your so great Shakespeare
says." "It was Dickens," I murmured, unable to
suppress a smile. "But what do you mean,
Poirot?" "I mean that Zoe Havering was an actress
before her marriage, that you and Japp only saw
the housekeeper in a dark hall, a dim middle-aged
figure in black with a faint subdued voice,
and finally that neither you nor Japp, nor the
local police whom the housekeeper fetched, ever
saw Mrs. Middleton and her mistress at one and
the same time. It was child's play for that clever
and daring woman. On the pretext of summoning
her mistress, she runs upstairs, slips on a
bright jumper and a hat with black curls attached
which she jams down over the grey transformation.
A few deft touches, and the make-up is
removed, a slight dusting of rouge, and the
brilliant Zoe Havering comes down with her
clear ringing voice. Nobody looks particularly
at the housekeeper. Why should they? There
is nothing to connect her with the crime. She,
too, has an alibi." "But the revolver that was found at Ealing?
Mrs. Havering could not have placed it there?" "No, that was Roger Havering's job--but it
was a mistake on their part. It put me on the
right track. A man who has committed a murder
with a revolver which he found on the spot would
fling it away at once, he would not carry it up
to London with him. No, the motive was clear,
the criminals wished to focus the interest of the
police on a spot far removed from Derbyshire
they were anxious to get the police away as soon
as possible from the vicinity of Hunter's Lodge.
Of course the revolver found at Ealing was not
the one with which Mr. Pace was shot. Roger
Havering discharged one shot from it, brought
it up to London, went straight to his club to
establish his alibi, then went quickly out to
Ealing by the district, a matter of about twenty
minutes only, placed the parcel where it was
found and so back to town. That charming
creature, his wife, quietly shoots Mr. Pace after
dinner--you remember he was shot from behind?
Another significant point, that!--reloads the
revolver and puts it back in its place, and then
starts off with her desperate little comedy." "It's incredible," I murmured, fascinated,
"and yet----" "And yet it is true. Bien sur, my friend, it
is true. But to bring that precious pair to justice,
that is another matter. Well, Japp must do what
he can--I have written him fully--but I very
much fear, Hastings, that we shall be obliged to
leave them to Fate, or le bon Dieu, whichever you
prefer." "The wicked flourish like a green bay tree,"
I reminded him. "But at a price, Hastings, always at a price,
croyez-moi!" Poirot's forebodings were confirmed. Japp,
though convinced of the truth of his theory, was
unable to get together the necessary evidence to
ensure a conviction. Mr. Pace's huge fortune passed into the hands
of his murderers. Nevertheless, Nemesis did
overtake them, and when I read in the paper
that the Hon. Roger and Mrs. Havering were
amongst those killed in the crashing of the Air
Mail to Paris I knew that Justice was satisfied.